Dev.g2p (#10)
MotherTongues/mothertongues-blog: _drafts/2020-08-07-g2p.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Getting from 'a' to 'b' with g2p"
author: AidanPine
categories: []
tags: [ tutorial, explanation, tech-showcase ]
image: assets/images/bonjour-g2p.png
description: "How to get from 'a' to 'b' using the g2p library"
featured: false
hidden: false
---

> This blog post describes the background context for a software tool called `g2p`. `g2p` is a tool for systematically converting certain characters[^1] into other ones. Common use cases include converting between a [writing system and the phonetic alphabet](#use-case-1-getting-the-pronunciation-from-a-words-spelling), between two [writing systems for the same language](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems), or between a legacy ['font-hacked' writing system and its current Unicode-supported version](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first blog post of six posts that describe the background context for a software tool called `g2p`. `g2p` is a tool for systematically converting certain characters[^1] into other ones. Common use cases are for [getting the pronunciation from a word's spelling](#use-case-1-getting-the-pronunciation-from-a-words-spelling), [converting for a language with multiple writing systems](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems), and [converting from legacy writing systems](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems).
```

Reviewer: - Changed the cases to be the titles of the case descriptions in the main text, they are nice and simple and pretty understandable.

- I think the introduction should also double something like a sales pitch. So in order to motivate a regular person doing language work in their community, I think it would be good to start with clearly and simply stating a problem they might be facing or the situation they'd be in in order for this to be useful. 
"Do you have transcriptions that suffer from x, y, and z?" kind of thing.

Author: this is great. I didn't commit this directly because I wanted to add a bit more context, but I incorporated the changes.

# What you need to know to understand this post

> - To understand the advanced section, you will need to know some [Python](https://www.python.org/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To understand the advanced section, you will need to be familiar with the programming language [Python](https://www.python.org/)
```

# Who is involved with this project?

- Maintainer (i.e. the person to bug with questions): [Aidan Pine](https://aidanpine.ca)
- Lots of [other contributors](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/graphs/contributors)

# What are the motivations behind G2P?

There are many reasons why you might want to systematically convert between different characters. Here are a few possible use cases:

### Use Case #1: Getting the pronunciation from a word's spelling

> Sometimes you want to convert between a language's writing system (also known as *orthography*) and its pronunciation. "Letters" in a writing system are usually referred to as "graphemes" and their corresponding meaningful sounds are referred to as "phonemes"; hence "g2p" or "grapheme-to-phoneme". 

Reviewer: What are some pratical examples of why I might want to convert between writing system/pronounciation?

Reviewer: So, after reading further I see you include ReadAlongs but I still think it would be good to have a one-off example here. Is there an example you can think of that's not ReadAlongs?

> Sometimes you want to convert between a language's writing system (also known as *orthography*) and its pronunciation. "Letters" in a writing system are usually referred to as "graphemes" and their corresponding meaningful sounds are referred to as "phonemes"; hence "g2p" or "grapheme-to-phoneme". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want to convert between a language's [writing system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Writing_system) (also known as *orthography*) and its pronunciation. "Letters" in a writing system are usually referred to as "graphemes" and their corresponding meaningful sounds are referred to as "phonemes"; hence "g2p" or "grapheme-to-phoneme". 
```

It gets a little more complicated than that though, because sometimes a grapheme is made of more than one character, as with the *digraph* "th" which can be pronounced *[unvoiced](https://www.thoughtco.com/voiced-and-voiceless-consonants-1212092#:~:text=Voiceless%20consonants%20do%20not%20use,as%20in%20%22thing%22)* as in 'thin' or *[voiced](https://www.thoughtco.com/voiced-and-voiceless-consonants-1212092#:~:text=Voiced%20Consonants,-Your%20vocal%20cords&text=As%20you%20pronounce%20a%20letter,W%2C%20Y%2C%20and%20Z.)* as in 'that'.

> The [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet) (IPA) is not so ambiguous! In IPA, the 'th' in 'thin' is written as **θ** and the 'th' in 'that' is written as **ð**. Knowing how to convert between the written and spoken form of a language is useful in a variety of computational tasks, but I will describe the usefulness specifically with a project called "ReadAlongs" [below](#readalongs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet) (IPA) is not so ambiguous! In IPA, the 'th' in 'thin' is written as **θ** and the 'th' in 'that' is written as **ð**. Knowing how to convert between the written and spoken form of a language is useful in a variety of computational tasks, such as aligning written transcriptions with its audio so that it is synced up. I will describe this task further with a project called "ReadAlongs" [in the following post](#readalongs). ** update link, if in following post
```

Reviewer: - ReadAlongs is mentioned a couple times after this and might not be actually described until the second post, so a small description would be useful and maybe keep attention, if that's an application the reader might be interested in.

Author: Same thing, I just added this to a commit.

### Use Case #2: A language with multiple writing systems

Some languages have two (or more!) different writing systems. Take Cree for example, where you can either write a word in *Standard Roman Orthography* like "ê-wêpâpîhkêwêpinamâhk" or in *Syllabics* like **ᐁᐍᐹᐲᐦᑫᐍᐱᐊᒫᕽ**. My colleague [Eddie](https://eddieantonio.ca) has a great blog post about a tool he created to convert between the two [here]({{ "why-a-new-cree-syllabics-converter" | absolute_url }}).

### Use Case #3: Converting from legacy writing systems

> Some languages historically used “font hacks” to render the characters in their writing system before they were supported on computers. There's a longer discussion to be had here, but the Coles notes version is that when computers were gaining widespread use among speakers of Indigenous languages, they weren't typically able to *render* (i.e., display) characters outside of the 128 characters supported by the [American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) or even any of the extensions to ASCII that provide a total of 256 character (e.g., [Latin-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1) for Western European languages). To get around this, language communities would come up with their own custom fonts (often referred to as “font hacks” or “font encodings”) where they would **override** the display of a characters like “©” which existed in Latin-1, as 'ǧ' instead (example taken from the Heiltsuk Doulos font). For more information on this topic, please check out ['Seeing the Heiltsuk Orthography from Font Encoding through to Unicode'](http://aidanpine.ca/static/cv/pdfs/Pine-Turin-Convertextract-2018.pdf) or ['Applications and innovations in typeface design for North American Indigenous languages'](https://markturin.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2020/06/Schillo_Turin_typeface_2020.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When computers were gaining widespread use among speakers of Indigenous languages, they weren't typically able to *render* (i.e., display) characters outside of the 128 characters supported by the [American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) or even any of the extensions to ASCII that provide a total of 256 character (e.g., [Latin-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1) for Western European languages). To get around this, language communities would come up with their own custom fonts (often referred to as “font hacks” or “font encodings”) where they would **override** the display of a characters like “©” which existed in Latin-1, as 'ǧ' instead (example taken from the Heiltsuk Doulos font). For more information on this topic, please check out ['Seeing the Heiltsuk Orthography from Font Encoding through to Unicode'](http://aidanpine.ca/static/cv/pdfs/Pine-Turin-Convertextract-2018.pdf) or ['Applications and innovations in typeface design for North American Indigenous languages'](https://markturin.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2020/06/Schillo_Turin_typeface_2020.pdf). 
```

Reviewer: I think this could use a couple of more sentences explaining why this is clearly bad, and also what g2p converts to (Unicode?) and why that's good. I tried to give it a shot but my words no good. I think it should hit the points
- When Font Hacks aren't usesable. On computer's where they didn't font hack it?
- Unicode is standard and pretty universal
- Makes it more accessible on different devices

Reviewer: Link for defining Unicode: https://www.unicode.org/faq/basic_q.html#:~:text=The%20easiest%20answer%20is%20that,%2C%20Georgian%2C%20Hangul%2C%20Ethiopic%2C

Reviewer 2: Haha, I think @roedoejet and I natually think font hacks = bad, so this thought doesn't even cross our minds!

But yes, font hacks are bad, because most computer systems and software assume your talking _different_ characters then the ones displayed. A common example of a font hack is [wingdings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wingdings#Wingdings); you're typing Latin characters, but getting different graphics — but the computer still thinks you're writing in Latin and will try to do things like spell check, autocomplete, grammar check, etc. all in Latin!

It's bad for interoperability, because any smart software system will have to understand your particular font and adjust itself appropriately. It's better to convert a font-hacked document to Unicode, since then the entire software ecosystem doesn't have to be aware of your font hack.

# How to get from 'a' to 'b' (or 'a' to 'æ') with g2p

> `g2p` is a Python library[^2] that helps you convert between different characters based on user-defined rules. The inspiration for how to write these rules was mostly taken from the notion of [phonological rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonological_rule), which is a common way of describing *multilevel* phonological changes in linguistics. *Multilevel* changes is the idea that a word, like 'cats' or 'dogs' can have multiple 'levels' of representation. For example, you might think of the way that those words are written in English orthography (writing system) as one level. Then, you might think of a general pronunciation for those words, written in the phonetic alphabet, as another level. You could also separate that level into more than one level by having a level each for [narrow and broad transcriptions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonetic_transcription#Narrow_versus_broad_transcription:~:text=orthography.-,Narrow%20versus%20broad%20transcription).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`g2p` is a Python library[^2] that helps you convert between different characters based on user-defined rules (i.e., rules defined by you). The inspiration for how to write these rules was mostly taken from the notion of [phonological rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonological_rule), which is a common way of describing *multilevel* phonological changes in linguistics. *Multilevel* changes is the idea that a word, like 'cats' or 'dogs' can have multiple 'levels' of representation. For example, you might think of the way that those words are written in English orthography (writing system) as one level. Then, you might think of a general pronunciation for those words, written in the phonetic alphabet, as another level. You could also separate that level into more than one level by having a level each for the noticeable sounds of a word and for the potentially spoken sounds of a word, known as the [broad and narrow transcriptions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonetic_transcription#Narrow_versus_broad_transcription:~:text=orthography.-,Narrow%20versus%20broad%20transcription) respectively.
```

Reviewer: You're gonna have to fact check my definition of broad and narrow

| Level Name |  Word #1   |  Word #2  | Word # 3 |
|---|---|---|---|
| Level 1 (orthography) | cat | dog | back |
| Level 2 (broad IPA) | kæt | dɑɡ | bæk |
| Level 3 (narrow IPA) | kʰæt | dɑɡ | bæk |

Now, just by looking at these three levels, you can probably see some fairly systematic rules here that you could imagine would get you from one level to the next, even if you don't know the phonetic alphabet by heart and even if you don't really know much about English phonology (sound patterns and systems).

One possible hypothesis would be that all 'a' characters in level one turn to 'æ', so we might want a rule to express that all instances of 'a' turn to /æ/. And, for another example, it looks like between levels 2 and 3, /k/ turns into either [k] or [kʰ] depending on whether it occurs before or after /æ/[^3]. So, with these hypotheses about the rules to transform from one level to another, how do we start translating this into rules for `g2p`?

> ## Basic Rule writing

Reviewer: How do I learn what my languages rules actually are? Do you have any online resources you know of where someone could become self-taught? Or do we gotta get a linguist to do it

> `g2p` lets you describe these patterns using **an ordered series of rules**. Each rule must be defined to have a sequence of one or more input characters and a sequence of zero or more output characters. We can define these rules in `g2p` either using a tabular spreadsheet format (CSV) or using a format called JavaScript Object Notation or [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html). To actually write these rules along with this blog post, I recommend getting some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). You could also write the spreadsheet-type rules in your favourite spreadsheet editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`g2p` lets you describe these patterns using **an ordered series of rules**. Each rule must be defined to have a sequence of one or more input characters and a sequence of zero or more output characters. We can define these rules in `g2p` either using a tabular spreadsheet format (e.g., with comma-separated values (.csv) or in an Excel spreadsheet (.xls))  or using a format called JavaScript Object Notation ([JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html)). To actually write these rules along with this blog post, I recommend getting some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). You could also write the spreadsheet-type rules in your favourite spreadsheet editor, such as Excel or Google Sheets.
```

Reviewer: Heather and I were *just* talking about how csv is not as well known file format as you think! And it makes it seem like CSV is somehow an acronym for tabular spreadsheet format.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I can remember starting to program and _then_ learning about CSV. Not just that, but there's no single CSV standard — just a series of common practices. But I guess it's simply put, a way of exporting a spreadsheet. I guess ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯

Reviewer 3: CSV is definitely not an official standard! And if you're working with MS Excel, the actual format of the CSV will depend on the language settings of your computer, which gave me all sorts of trouble in the past (I had my computer in French, in which case trying to read or write CSV files with English decimal numbers in them in really non-trivial...) Stupid, stupid software!
Anyway, as long as with stick with simple CSV contents, just four columns in this case, it's not too bad.

For example, rules written in the tabular comma-separated values (CSV) format:

| in | out |
|---|---|
| a | æ |

> 

Reviewer: I'm conflicted on this example. So, I'm a laymen, I'm not that familiar with different file formats. If I'm now typing along in Visual studio code, then this should look like

in, out
a, æ

If I'm entering into a spreadsheet, _then_ it would look like your example.

Does that make sense?

or using [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html):

```json
[
    {
        "in": "a",
        "out": "æ"
    }
]
```

> Both of the above rules capture our first rule that turns an orthographic 'a' into a broad IPA /æ/. You can choose to write your rules in **either** format, although JSON will offer you slightly more flexibility when writing [advanced rules](#advanced-a-deeper-dive-into-writing-tricky-rules).

Reviewer 4: " broad IPA /æ/" 
Ended up formatting as 
"...... broad IPA /
æ/"

If we want to write rules that depend on a particular context, we need a couple more columns (CSV) or keys (JSON) than just `in` and `out`. This is where we use `context_before` and `context_after`. So, our second rule from above was to turn /k/ to [kʰ] when the character after /k/ is /æ/. Here, we could write the rules like this:

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| k | kʰ | | æ |

or like this using JSON:

```json
[
    {
        "in": "k",
        "out": "kʰ",
        "context_after": "æ"
    }
]
```

> 

Reviewer: So the next section is about addressing trickier rules, but some of it is still recquired for based rule writing (e.g., rule writing) and so it should be clear this section is introductory but insuffiencient. 

Maybe ending it with "This is a basic introduction, but before moving any further on your rule making, please read the section [Trickier rules section] in the next section (maybe TBD)

## Ok, so how do I actually get these rules to do something?

So, you've understood the [basics of writing rules](#basic-rule-writing) either described above and you want to actually use them to convert something! This section describes exactly how to do that. 

> The easiest way to write rules quickly is using the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/) web application[^4]. Once landing on the G2P Studio page, you can scroll down to the [Custom Rules](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/#out_delimiter-0:~:text=Custom%20Rules) section and start directly editing the spreadsheet available there. Below is a list of all the rules to capture the transformations between level 1 and level 2 above. There are some rules that we discussed in that section, and some others that might look unfamiliar. For a full description of some of these rules, have a look at the [advanced rule-writing section](#a-deeper-dive-into-writing-tricky-rules).
> 
> {% picture custom-rules-g2p-studio.png %}
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to write rules quickly is using the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/) web application[^4]. Once landing on the G2P Studio page, you can scroll down to the [Custom Rules](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/#out_delimiter-0:~:text=Custom%20Rules) section and start directly editing the spreadsheet available there. Below is a list of all the rules to capture the transformations between level 1 and level 2 above. 

{% picture custom-rules-g2p-studio.png %}

There are some rules that we discussed in that section, and some others that might look unfamiliar. For a full description of some of these rules, have a look at the [advanced rule-writing section](#a-deeper-dive-into-writing-tricky-rules).

```

Reviewer: Also, G2P studio should be mentioned in the previous section, especially since there's no import function.

Once you have written your rules in this section, you can write some text in the left text area at the top of the G2P Studio, and `g2p` will apply your rules and produce the output in the right text area as seen below:

{% picture custom-rules-output-g2p-studio.png %}

You can also click on 'Export' under the Custom Rules section to export your rules to a CSV file if you want to save them for later.

## Mapping configuration

> When you combine multiple rules in `g2p` for a particular purpose, this is called a *mapping*. In addition to each file containing your rules, you need a configuration file that tells `g2p` how to process your rules. We write mapping configurations in files titled YAML file `config.yaml`. ".yaml" is the file extension for YAML which stands for 'Yet Another Markup Language' - which might be how you're feeling right now after having already learned about Comma Separated Value (CSV) files and JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)!!

Reviewer: What does it mean to combine multiple rules? What's an example of a particular purpose?

In order to edit your YAML configuration file, you will need some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). 

Here is a basic configuration for your mapping:

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English # this is a shared value for all the mappings in this configuration
    display_name: English to IPA # this is a 'display name'. It is a user-friendly name for your mapping.
    in_lang: eng # This is the code for your language input. By convention in g2p this should contain your language's ISO 639-3 code
    out_lang: eng-ipa # This is the code for the output of your mapping. By convention in g2p we suffix -ipa to the in_lang for mappings between an orthography and IPA
    type: mapping 
    authors: # This is a way to keep track of who has contributed to the mapping
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json # This is the path to your mapping file. It should be in the same folder as your config.yaml file
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can search for your language's ISO 639-3 code [here](https://iso639-3.sil.org/code_tables/639/data)
```

If you are familiar with yaml, you will see that you can have more than one mapping under the `mappings` key. So to add another mapping to this file, it would look like this:

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English 
    display_name: English to IPA 
    in_lang: eng 
    out_lang: eng-ipa 
    type: mapping 
    authors:
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json 
  - language_name: English
    display_name: English IPA to Arpabet
    in_lang: eng-ipa 
    out_lang: eng-arpabet
    type: mapping 
    authors: 
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_ipa_to_arpabet.json 
```

> If you're not familiar with YAML, and you're not just copy pasting from here, I recommend having a look at one of the many [tutorials](https://gettaurus.org/docs/YAMLTutorial/) on how to use YAML properly before attempting to write your own mapping configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're not familiar with YAML, I would suggest just copy pasting from here. If you would like to learn more, I recommend having a look at one of the many [tutorials](https://gettaurus.org/docs/YAMLTutorial/) on how to use YAML properly before attempting to write your own mapping configuration.
```

====
***PROPOSED END OF FIRST POST***
====

## Advanced: A deeper dive into writing tricky rules

> You may have noticed that the rules described above for converting words like 'dog' and 'cat' to IPA are woefully incomplete. The real world use cases for `g2p` often need to account for a lot more messiness than was described in the artificial example above. In fact, for languages like English, `g2p` is likely **not** a good solution. The English writing system is notoriously inconsistent, and there already exist a variety of other tools that account for all of the lexical (word-specific) idiosyncracies in deriving the IPA-form from the orthographic form. For many Indigenous languages, the writing system is sufficiently close to the spoken form that `g2p` is a very appropriate solution. In the following sections, I'll describe some common problems when writing rules, and how to fix them.

Reviewer: What assumptions is G2P built on? Are these easy to list? 
What if my language is as messy English? Especially if I find this and I'm working on my Indigenous language that comes from outside of Canada.

### Rule Ordering

> **The order of your rules in `g2p` really matters**! This is because some rules can either create or remove the context for other rules to apply. In linguistics, these rule ordering patterns are usually talked about as either [feeding, bleeding, counter-feeding, or counter-bleeding](https://linguistics.stackexchange.com/questions/6084/whats-the-difference-between-counterbleeding-bleeding-and-feeding) relationships. There are potentially valid reasons to want to encode any of these types of relationships in your rules. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The order of your rules in `g2p` really matters**! This is because some rules can either create or remove the context for other rules to apply. There are [four primary rule ordering patterns](https://linguistics.stackexchange.com/questions/6084/whats-the-difference-between-counterbleeding-bleeding-and-feeding):
    - Feeding: 
    - Counter-feeding:
    - Bleeding:
    - Counter-bleeding:
There are potentially valid reasons to want to encode any of these types of relationships in your rules. 
```

Reviewer: It's a lot cognitively to read these jargon terms with no explanation, and also not be clear where it's useful in the readers rule-making journey. Is this a one-off line or do I genuingly need to understand these four things?

I started trying to explain each of these in laymen terms, but it's so out of my field I'm 100% sure it was wrong.

I would also be careful relying on _only_ a stackoverload post, because they can be confusing to read for someone not familiar with the site (is the first thing I'm reading (the Q) have the right answer?) and also the responses are normally written for people with at least a relevant base knowledge, and so are very jargon heavy.

> To illustrate a possible problem, let's consider a `g2p` mapping for language that converts 'a̱' to 'ə' and 'a' to 'æ'. 'a̱' is a sequence of a normal a followed by a combining macron below (\u0331). Because \u0331 ('a̱') is easily confusable with \u0332 ('a̲'), in order to follow the rule of thumb for [Unicode escape sequences](#unicode-escape-sequences), I'll write the rules as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate a possible problem, let's consider a `g2p` mapping for language that converts 'a̱' to 'ə' and 'a' to 'æ'. 'a̱' is a sequence of a normal 'a' followed by a combining macron (the simple "line" accent) below (\u0331). Because \u0331 ('a̱') is easily confusable with \u0332 ('a̲'), in order to follow the rule of thumb for [Unicode escape sequences](#unicode-escape-sequences), I'll write the rules as follows:
```

| in | out |
|---|---|
| a | æ |
| a\u0331 | ə |

Now, assuming an input to this mapping of 'a̱' (a\u0331), we would get 'æ̱' (æ\u0331) instead of 'ə'. Why is that? Because the first rule applies and turns 'a' into 'æ' before the second rule has a chance to apply. This is called a *bleeding* relationship. In order to avoid it, we would need to write our rules as follows:

| in | out |
|---|---|
| a\u0331 | ə |
| a | æ |

With this ordering, our input of 'a̱' (a\u0331) would turn into 'ə' as we expect, and our input of 'a' would turn into æ also as expected. Try it out on the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com) if you don't believe me!

> ### Unicode Escape Sequences

Reviewer 4: Unicode Escape Sequences should come before Rule Ordering because of the example used in the Rule Ordering section

Sometimes you need rules to convert from characters that either don't render very well, or render in a confusing way. In those cases, you can use [Unicode escape sequences](https://www.rapidtables.com/code/text/unicode-characters.html). For example, maybe you want to write a rule that converts the standard ASCII 'g' to the strict IPA Unicode /ɡ/. As you can likely see in your browser, these characters look very similar, but they're not the same character! The ASCII 'g' is U+0067 and the strict IPA 'ɡ' is U+0261. So, you can write a rule as follows:

| in | out |
|---|---|
| \u0067 | \u0261 |

or using [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html):

```json
[
    {
        "in": "\u0067",
        "out": "\u0261"
    }
]
```

This is also helpful when you need to write rules between combining characters or other confusable characters. The **rule of thumb** is, if your rules are clearer using Unicode escape sequences, do it! Otherwise, just use the normal character in place.

> 

Reviewer: The ordering and content of this section is kind of confusion. Mostly around using terms you haven't defined yet (e.g. rule of thumb) and you use terms you never really define or give examples.

I think this section would be much stronger if it went something like:
    1. Rule Ordering: Defines what the reader needs to know around rule ordering (bleeding & feeding and what not)
    2. Unicode Escape Sequences: Defines the what and why around unicode escape sequences
    3. The example that's currently at the end of rule ordering, which combines the two things I just learned into a pratical example.

As described in the earlier part of this post, your rules apply in the order you write them. And as described in the advanced section on [rule ordering](#rule-ordering), sometimes this can make your mapping produce unexpected results! 

If you set your mapping to `as_is: false`, `g2p` will sort all of your rules based on the length of the input to the rule, so that rules with longer inputs apply before rules with shorter inputs. This prevents some common 'bleeding' rule-ordering relationships described in the [rule ordering](#rule-ordering) section. So, if you declared your rules as:

```json
[
    {
        "in": "a",
        "out": "b"
    },
        {
        "in": "ab",
        "out": "c"
    }
]
```

Then, with `as_is: true` (the default), you would get 'bb' as the output for the input 'ab'. Whereas with `as_is: false`, you would get 'c' as the output for the input 'ab'.

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English 
    display_name: English to IPA 
    in_lang: eng 
    out_lang: eng-ipa 
    type: mapping
    authors:
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json 
    as_is: false   # <------- Add this
```

##### `case_sensitive` (default: true)

> The default is to treat your rules as case sensitive, but setting `case_sensitive: false`, will make your rules case insensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default is to treat your rules as [case sensitive](https://www.lifewire.com/what-does-case-sensitive-mean-2625824#:~:text=Anything%20that%20is%20case%20sensitive,cases%2C%20are%20not%20considered%20equal.), but setting `case_sensitive: false`, will make your rules case insensitive.
```

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English 
    display_name: English to IPA 
    in_lang: eng 
    out_lang: eng-ipa 
    type: mapping
    authors:
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json 
    case_sensitive: false   # <------- Add this
```

##### `escape_special` (default: False)

> As I will describe later in the section on [regular expressions](#regular-expressions), you can define rules using 'special' characters. By default, these characters are interpreted as 'special', but if you want all special characters in your mapping to be interpreted as their actual characters, you can set `escape_special: true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I will describe later in the section on [regular expressions](#regular-expressions), you can define rules using 'special' characters. By default, these characters are interpreted as 'special', but if you want all special characters in your mapping to be interpreted as their actual characters, you can set `escape_special: true`. If your language's writing system contains non-letter characters, like punctuation, it is worth checking [a list of special characters in regular expressions](http://fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/manual/Regular_expressions_1__Special_characters.html). If your language's writing system _does_ have characters that are special characters in regular expressions, it is safest to set `escape_special: true`.
```

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English 
    display_name: English to IPA 
    in_lang: eng 
    out_lang: eng-ipa 
    type: mapping
    authors:
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json 
    escape_special: true   # <------- Add this
```

##### `norm_form` (default: "NFD")

> If you've never heard of Unicode normalization don't worry, you're not alone! But, for writing rules and mappings using `g2p`, there can be some surprising 'gotcha' moments if you don't choose the right normalization strategy. 
> 
> The basic gist of the problem is that there can be multiple ways to write the *same* character in Unicode, depending on whether you use 'combining characters' to type or not. For example, on some keyboards, you might type 'é' by writing an e first and then another keystroke to type the acute accent that sits above it. The Unicode representation for this would be \u0065 (e) followed by \u0301 (a combining acute accent), however there is an entirely separate Unicode code point that has these two characters *pre-composed* (\u00e9). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we explored earlier, there can be multiple ways to write the *same* character in Unicode, depending on whether you use 'combining characters' to type or not. For example, on some keyboards, you might type 'é' by writing an e first and then another keystroke to type the acute accent that sits above it. The Unicode representation for this would be \u0065 (e) followed by \u0301 (a combining acute accent), however there is an entirely separate Unicode code point that has these two characters *pre-composed* (\u00e9). 

Optimally, we want normalize everything so that our Unicode representations are consistent. If you've never heard of [Unicode normalization](https://unicode.org/faq/normalization.html) don't worry, you're not alone! But, for writing rules and mappings using `g2p`, there can be some surprising 'gotcha' moments if you don't choose the right normalization strategy. 
```

> Many fonts will render these two different representations identically and it can be really difficult and confounding as a user if both appear in the same text. This causes problems, like text that looks identical will not appear in "find & replace" or search engines will not find the text that you're looking for, even though something that _looks_ identical exists. Luckily, there is a standard for normalizing these differences so that all instances of sequences like \u0065\u0301 would be (NF)Composed into \u00e9, or the opposite direction where all instances of \u00e9 would be (NF)Decomposed into \u0065\u0301. For a more in-depth conversation on this, check out [this blog article](https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many fonts will render these two different representations identically and it can be really difficult and confounding as a user if both appear in the same text. This causes problems, like text that looks identical will not appear in "find & replace" or search engines will not find the text that you're looking for, even though something that _looks_ identical exists. Luckily, there is a standard for normalizing these differences so that all instances of sequences like \u0065\u0301 would be (NFC)Composed into \u00e9, or the opposite direction where all instances of \u00e9 would be (NFD)Decomposed into \u0065\u0301. For a more in-depth conversation on this, check out [this blog article](https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html).
TLDR: If you want your characters with accents as a single Unicode character, change the `norm_form` key to `NFC`. If you want your characters with accents as two Unicode characters, you can leave the `norm_form` key as is.
```

```yaml
mappings:
  - language_name: English 
    display_name: English to IPA 
    in_lang: eng 
    out_lang: eng-ipa 
    type: mapping
    authors:
      - Aidan Pine
    mapping: eng_to_ipa.json 
    norm_form: "NFC"   # <------- Add your Unicode normalization strategy here
```

##### `out_delimiter` (default: '')

> Some mappings require that a delimiting character (or delimiting characters) be inserted whenever a rule applies. So, using the example from the first part of this post, maybe you want `kæt` to go to `kʰ|æ|t` instead of `kʰæt`. For this, you would set `out_delimiter: "|"` in your mapping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some mappings require that a separating or `[delimiting` character](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delimiter#:~:text=A%20delimiter%20is%20a%20sequence,sequence%20of%20comma%2Dseparated%20values.) (or delimiting characters) be inserted whenever a rule applies. So, using the example from the first part of this post, maybe you want `kæt` to go to `kʰ|æ|t` instead of `kʰæt`. For this, you would set `out_delimiter: "|"` in your mapping.
```

|    variable name       |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 
|-----------|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---| 
| VOWEL     | a | e | i | o | u | æ | å | ø |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 
| CONSONANT | p | b | t | d | k | g | f | s | h | v | j | r | l | m | n | 
| FRONT     | i | e | œ | ø | y |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 
| BACK      | u | o | a |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 

Then, in your configuration, you can add the file to a specific mapping using `abbreviations: abbreviations.csv`. After adding it to your mapping, you can write the above rule like this instead:

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| dd | ð | VOWEL | VOWEL |

You can also use abbreviations like this in the G2P studio by writing them in the section at the bottom of the page titled 'Custom Abbreviations' They will be automatically applied to your custom rules above.

{% picture g2p-abbs.png %}

### Regular Expressions

> [Regular expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) are used ubiquitously in programming to define certain search patterns in text. In fact, this is how `g2p` rules work! They eventually get compiled into a regular expression too. For the most part, you can add regular expression syntax to your rules. So, suppose you wanted to write a rule that deleted word-final 's', you could write the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Regular expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) are used ubiquitously in programming to define certain search patterns in text. In fact, this is how `g2p` rules work! They eventually get compiled into a regular expression too. For the most part, you can add regular expression syntax to your rules. So, suppose you wanted to write a rule that deleted the 's' at the end of the word, you could write the following:
```

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| s |  | \S | \s\|$ |

> As you can see [in this handy regular expression cheatsheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) our rule turns 's' into nothing if it is preceded by \S (not white space) and followed by either \s (white space) or $ (end of the text).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see [in this handy regular expression cheatsheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) our removes 's' if it is preceded by \S (a non-white space character) and followed by either \s (white space) or $ (the end of the text).
```

Note: There are some 'gotchas' with writing regular expressions using g2p. This is a technical note, but if you're writing some complicated regular expressions and they're not working, don't hesitate to [raise an issue](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/issues/new/choose). For example there are some active issues around edge cases where regular expressions and `g2p`'s custom [syntax for indices](#using-specific-indices) don't play nice together.

### Using specific indices

> Even people familiar with using `g2p` might not be aware that one of its main features is that it preserves indices between input and output segments. Meaning that when we convert from something like 'kæt' to 'kʰæt' as in the first example, `g2p` knows that it's the 'k' that turned into the 'k' and 'ʰ' as seen below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important feature of `g2p` is that it preserves character orders, known as indices, between input and output segments. For example, when we convert from something like 'kæt' to 'kʰæt' as in the first example, `g2p` knows that it's the 'k' that turned into the 'k' and 'ʰ' as seen below.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if character order, or maybe character order place is the right wording here, but indices needs to be explicitly defined.

With this example, does that mean that input 'k' has index 0 and output 'k'+'h' has index 0?

{% picture k-to-kh.png %}

> The default interpretation of rule indices by `g2p` is that it zips up the characters between the input and the output of a rule until it reaches the end of either one, then it glombs on any remaining characters the last character of the shorter one (whether that's the input or output). For example, compare the following examples where 'abc' is converted to 'ab' and glombs the excess input character onto the last output character:

Reviewer: This paragraph has the opposite of a jargon problem lol. 
- What does "zips up" mean? 
- What does "glombs on" mean? (confirmed: glomb is not a dictionary word ( ͡❛ ⍙ ͡❛)
- Is there string concatenation happening? This is for assigning indices right?
- Does this way result in input and output being the same "length"? (or I guess, having the same largest index or smth?)

Reviewer: After staring at some of the pictures, I _think_ I get what's going on, but a lot of the wording here makes it sound like string concatenation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default interpretation of rule indices by `g2p` is that it lines up the characters between the input and the output of a rule until it reaches the end of either one, then it adds any remaining characters to the last character's index of the shorter, whether that's the input or output. For example, compare the following examples where 'abc' is converted to 'ab' and adds the excess input character onto the last output character and the final two characters of the input have the same index:
```

Reviewer: Is this right? I get the mapping metaphor I think, but the point of indices is that character(s) of input/output correspond to character(s) of output/input?
The mapping operation is matching indices?

{% picture abc-ab.png %}

> and where 'ab' is converted to 'abc' and glombs the excess output character onto the last input character:

Reviewer: It's the "glombing" excess output onto input that confused me. 
Characters from the output are not now attatched to the last input character right?
It's more like, if one is longer than the other, the remaining excess characters all get assigned the same index, which is the length of the shorter. (right???)

Reviewer: Here's my artist's rendering

![Screen Shot 2020-09-09 at 8 43 14 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22920735/92675651-2921da00-f2dd-11ea-9243-f4709ec620cb.png)

Reviewer: i think i got this backwards but idea holds

{% picture ab-abc.png %}

> But what if - for some silly and imaginary reason - we want to show that it was actually 'a' that turned into 'c', and 'b' that turned into 'ab'? Well, we can use special `g2p` syntax for explicitly writing these indices. Instead of, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But what if we want to show that it was actually 'a' that turned into 'c', and 'b' that turned into 'ab'? Well, we can use special `g2p` syntax for explicitly writing these indices. Instead of, 
```

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| ab | abc | |  |

we can write

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| a{1}b{2} | ab{2}c{1} | |  |

Now, our indices will reflect our imaginary need to index 'a' with 'c' and 'b' with 'ab':

{% picture ab-abc-i.png %}

> Using the explicit indices syntax will break up your rule into a number of smaller rules that apply the same defaults of above but to explicit sets of characters. You **must** use curly brackets, but the choice of character you put inside is arbitrary — it just has to match on both sides. By convention, we use natural numbers. This will match all the characters to the left of each pair of curly brackets on the input with the matching index on the output. So here, 'a' is matched with 'c' and 'b' is matched with 'ab'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the explicit indices syntax will break up your rule into a number of smaller rules that apply the same defaults of above but to explicit sets of characters. You **must** use curly brackets, but the choice of character you put inside is arbitrary — it just has to match on both sides. By convention, we use positive numbers. This will match all the characters to the left of each pair of curly brackets on the input with the matching index on the output. So here, 'a' is matched with 'c' and 'b' is matched with 'ab'.
```

Reviewer: sometimes my changes don't show highlighted, but the only thing I changed was "natural" to "positive"

These can get fairly complicated, so we recommend only using this functionality either for demonstration purposes, or for specific applications which require the preservation of indices.

## Adding a 'pre-processing' mapping

> It's often not sufficient to just write a mapping between the characters in a language's orthography and the IPA. As seen in [use case #2](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems) and [use case #3](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems), real-world text input is pretty messy, and if we want ReadAlongs or Convertextract - or any other tool that uses `g2p` - to work properly, we need to account for as much of that messiness as possible. Generally speaking, solving this kind of messiness is usually called 'Text Normalization'.[^n] This 'normalization' can either be about ensuring that the same Unicode characters are used consistently, or it can also be about converting symbols into their pronounced form, like & or 123. 

Reviewer: Link ReadAlongs and Convertextract to their descriptions below.

Second, maybe we have a text that has a lot of puncutation like '&' in it. We could write a mapping here for that as well (example in Danish):

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| & | og | |  |

How do we link this up with the rest of our mappings? We recommend calling these mappings `<yourlang>-norm`. When you run `g2p update`, `g2p` creates a [directed graph](https://mathinsight.org/definition/directed_graph#:~:text=A%20directed%20graph%20is%20graph,digraph%20or%20a%20directed%20network.) between all possible mappings. Consider we have a `g2p` pipeline from 'dan' to 'eng-arpabet' that goes through the `g2p` graph like so, 'dan' → 'dan-ipa' → 'eng-ipa' → 'eng-arpabet'. We basically want to add one more conversion along this path that does this normalization step. So, we [configure a mapping](#mapping-configuration) for a mapping from 'dan' → 'dan-norm' containing our normalizations, then we rename the existing mapping to 'dan-norm' → 'dan-ipa'. Then, we `g2p update` and the next time we run a mapping from 'dan' → 'eng-arpabet', it will pass through the normalization mapping too.

====
***PROPOSED END OF SECOND POST***
====

## Applications

> There are number of different software tools that are already making use of `g2p`. For general purpose use in Python, have a look at [this section](#advanced-use-in-python). G2P is also used extensively in the [ReadAlongs](#readalongs) project for creating interactive audio/text documents and in [Convertextract](#convertextract), a tool for doing `g2p` transformations in Microsoft Office documents while preserving the original document formatting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are number of different software tools that are already making use of `g2p`. For general purpose use in Python, have a look at [this section](#advanced-use-in-python). G2P is also used extensively in the [ReadAlongs](#readalongs) project for creating interactive audio/text documents and in [Convertextract](#convertextract), a tool for doing `g2p` transformations in Microsoft Office documents while preserving the original document formatting. These two applications are described in detail below.
```

> ### ReadAlongs

Reviewer: Should this be in this blog post? I think ReadAlongs might deserve it's own blog post, and then can instead be linked throughout this post, wherever it's mentioned.

Reviewer: I held off a bit on asking for more details in the readalongs, but I think in a separate post some explanations could use a bit more beefing.

ReadAlongs is an exploratory research project from the [National Research Council's Indigenous Language Technology Project](https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/research-collaboration/programs/canadian-indigenous-languages-technology-project).

Language revitalization communities have potentially many different recordings of language and some associated text, but mobilizing these materials into something that is educationally useful can be time consuming. It's also tough from the learner's perspective to try and follow along the text (maybe a Word Document) just by simply playing the audio. It's easy to get lost in the recording quickly, and from personal experience, trying to do that usually involves a lot of frustrating rewinding.

What if we could develop a tool that *automatically* figured out what parts of the audio file corresponded to what parts of the text? In [Natural Language Processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing), this is called *forced alignment*, and this is fundamentally what the ReadAlongs project does. But how does it do it? In part, by using a whole bunch of `g2p` mappings!

> First of all, it's good to know that forced alignment is essentially a "solved problem" for languages with a lot of data, thanks to people like David Huggins-Daines who is a collaborator on the ReadAlongs project. And, if you know Python, and have 20+ hours of manually aligned text and audio in your language, you can train a model using one of the few tools out there developed for this task, like [the Montreal Forced Aligner](https://montreal-forced-aligner.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). But what if you don't have that much data (or any) and what if you don't know Python? If your language has a `g2p` mapping between its writing system and the ipa, you can likely circumvent that whole process. Here's how:

Reviewer: Especially if ReadAlongs were its own blog post, going into the implications of having a trained model and what that means would be \*chefs kiss\*

We take a model for doing forced alignment on English and we manually write a `g2p` mapping from the writing system to IPA for the language we want to make a ReadAlong for. For example's sake let's say, Kanyen'kéha (Mohawk). This step requires somebody who is both familiar with the writing system used, and with the International Phonetic Alphabet. 

> Then, we use the very cool Python library [PanPhon](https://github.com/dmort27/panphon) to figure out the mapping between the IPA characters in Mohawk and their *closest* IPA equivalents in English. We call this mapping a "Kanyen'kéha IPA to English IPA" mapping. If you have already created your mapping between the orthography and the IPA, you can generate this "Kanyen'kéha IPA to English IPA" using the `g2p` command line. 

Reviewer: Should this library be mentioned earlier in g2p? When the reader is hypothetically building their rules and IPA mappings? Would this be useul there?

### Advanced: use in Python and the command line

#### Installation

We recommend installing `g2p` using [pip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pip_(package_manager)):

```python
pip install g2p
```

If you are going to be creating your own mapping or editing `g2p` in any way, you must first fork `g2p` by going to [https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p) and forking the project to your own GitHub space.

Once you've forked `g2p`, clone your own fork:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YourGitHubUsername/g2p.git
```

and then do an *editable* pip installation:

```bash
cd g2p && pip install -e .
```

#### Usage

Using `g2p` within Python can be done, either programatically using the `make_g2p` function:

```python
>>> from g2p import make_g2p
>>> transducer = make_g2p('dan', 'eng-arpabet')
>>> transducer('hej').output_string
'HH EH Y'
```

#### Command Line Interface

You can also use `g2p` from the command line. The basic command for conversions is:

```bash
g2p convert <input_text> <in_lang> <out_lang>
```

So in practice:

```bash
$ g2p convert hej dan eng-arpabet
HH EH YY
```

## Advanced: contributing your rules to the main `g2p` library

> You've written some cool rules and you want to contribute, that's awesome! There are lots of benefits to contributing your mapping to `g2p`. First of all, once your mapping is accepted, you'll have it available and live on [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com). Second, once the next version of `g2p` is released with your mapping, it will be automatically built in to the [Convertextract](#convertextract) library. Third, if your mapping is between a language's writing system and the IPA, you can also get ReadAlongs support for your language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've written some cool rules and you want to contribute, that's awesome! There are lots of benefits to contributing your mapping to `g2p`. First of all, submit your mapping to have it accepted (for instructions on how, see below). Once your mapping is accepted, you'll have it available and live on [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com). Second, once the next version of `g2p` is released with your mapping, it will be automatically built in to the [Convertextract](#convertextract) library. Third, if your mapping is between a language's writing system and the IPA, you can also get ReadAlongs support for your language.
```
